Do you see this as a risky book at all?
Oh, all of my books.
If I don't see them as risky books at the beginning, I don't start them usually.
Well, I wrote a hundred pages of it and then threw it out and started again.
So it was difficult to figure out how to come at it.
as it were it was always a fascinating story but how to tell it I think was the problem I read someplace that you actually did a television treatment in the 70s early 70s but I was using at that time only one source because I was quite young and inexperienced and I thought non-fiction meant true and that this one version that I had read was the true one
which, as it turned out, it wasn't.
The one you mentioned, I mean, you obviously noticed.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So it became interesting as a novel when I realized that, in fact, people had been fictionalizing the story from the word go.
They had all had their biases, they had all had their own slants, they had had their
They took sides a lot, like the Lizzie Borden case, or the O.J.
Simpson case, but even more like cases that involve a man and a woman in a violent crime, and what usually happens is that public opinion decides the guy did it, but then they're divided on the subject of the woman.
Was she the instigator, or was she a helpless
Bystander, victim, stooge, whatever.
Had there been—and you make quite a point in that the journalism of the day was just deplorable—probably not much better or worse than it is today.
Well, it was very party-free.
Each newspaper had a political stance, and everybody knew what those were.
If you wanted to get a couple of sides, you got a couple of newspapers.
But in terms of the facts?
In terms of the facts, if there were fact facts, such as what day was the inquest, they didn't usually get those wrong.
What day was the execution?
How long did the trial take?
Those are pretty reliable.
But they editorialized a lot.
And they did things that probably wouldn't be as allowed today, although they do seem to go on all the time.
I think my favorite is the guy who said that the not
in the cloth around the neck of Nancy Montgomery that this knot could only have been tied by two people, and therefore Grace must be guilty.
Well, there is no such knot.
It's just rubbish.
Had there been more reliable reports, if the record were stronger?
Yeah, but with all of these cases, with all of these murder cases, what is a reliable report?
Now, what is reliable?
There's what she said.
There's what he said.
There's what somebody else said they thought they saw.
And if you've ever been to a trial, you know this.
Did you hear a noise in the middle of the night?
Well, I heard a sort of a noise.
Well, what time was it?
Well, it must have been five in the morning.
Well, so-and-so says that she saw you in your car at five in the morning.
Well, I guess it couldn't have been five.
Maybe it was three.
You know, just countless stuff like this.
Okay.
But let's say the record was clearer in any case.
Let's suppose, yeah.
But let's say, I wonder if you would be, have been as disposed to write a novel.
I think it helps.
Probably not.
What I'm saying is, I guess it really suits your purposes that there's so much.
Well, it made it interesting.
I mean, it made it actually quite, at the same time, baffling and fascinating.
You know, I've asked any number of
Shakespeare is a passion of mine.
If you could ask Shakespeare a question, what would you ask him?
Pick your writer of choice about whom there's so much unknown.
Had you been this woman who had these interviews, I mean there must be any number of questions you personally would like to have asked her.
To her, to Grace, yes, but what would she have told me?
That's a great answer.
You see?
Of course, she's not going to tell you.
If she's guilty, she's not going to tell you the truth.
And if she's innocent, you're not necessarily going to believe her.
So there's always this gap between what might have happened, what the person says happened, and what you think of what they said happened.
I'm following you.
Yeah, yeah.
And she herself, I think, was three different versions?
Yeah, the first version was, I don't know.
I don't know where Nancy was.
Search me.
I have no idea.
Kind of like O.J.
I don't know.
Maybe my son did it.
Well, I didn't know for sure where she was, but I had a suspicion that she might have been in the cellar.
When she was going, I don't know, she was also saying, well, James McDermott said she'd gone across to the sprint, so that's what I thought.
And the third version, I saw him dragging her along the floor by the hair.
What would you have asked her, though?
I guess it's smooth because you don't know who you still can't be.
Who would I have been then?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, had you been the inquiring... Had I been the inquiring person, well, would I have been a reporter?
Would I have been Dr. Simon Jordan?
Would I have been a matron at the penitentiary?
Because there's always... There's a teller, but there's a listener.
And, of course, those things interact.
As you know, having done a gazillion-trillion-million interview, you know that you interact with whoever you're talking to, and that shapes what comes out.
It is, I think, to your benefit that, I think you pointed this out in a couple of your interviews, it does help you that there's a lot that isn't known.
Of course.
As a fiction writer, it helped me a whole bunch.
So where the facts were clear... Where the facts were clear, I couldn't change them.
But you could have, though.
No, no, no, not according to my own rules.
I mean, that's important to point out.
I mean, this doesn't seem to stop other people.
Well, but it stops me.
Where the facts are clear, you know, in many cases.
Yeah.
No, if there's a clear fact, my own rule was that I couldn't change it.
Now, is this a responsibility you feel to the facts, or to the woman, or to all the principles as well?
I think it's a bit of game theory.
A bit of what, I'm sorry?
Game theory.
You know, it's not real if you cheat.
If you're playing solitaire, you can't kind of surreptitiously take one of those red kings and stick it inwards.
Did you conceive of it as a mystery?
No, I conceived of it as a novel.
Do you agree that it's a mystery?
It's not a murder mystery.
It's a mystery about a murder.
That's how I would put it.
In a murder mystery, you would have to come up with the solution or else all the readers would rise up against you.
You couldn't just end it by saying, well, I don't know.
Although, I think McGray has a couple in which he sort of shrugs his shoulders.
He certainly has a couple in which he knows who did it but isn't going to turn them in.
So a couple like that.
But you do abide by certain conventions, though.
Yeah, the murder mystery is bound by conventions, and the clues have to be, although misleading, they can't be completely bogus.
You have to give the reader a shot.
The solution has to be convincing.
So you felt it incumbent upon you to abide by these conventions?
But I wasn't writing a murder mystery.
I understand, but nevertheless, there are conventions.
I had to abide by the convention.
The convention I abided by was—there were two of them.
Number one, the things in the story had to be suggested by stuff in the historical record.
There was a peddler, therefore I got to have Jeremiah the peddler.
You're smiling.
You had fun when you did this.
I had, well, sometimes I had fun, and sometimes I had horrible times, you know, like everybody else.
Sometimes I had the awful moment, none of this is working, this isn't going to happen, I'm giving up, and so forth.
And the other one was you can't, if there's a real fact, you can't change it.
So date of the execution of McDermott, that's known.
Large crowd gathered.
It was raining.
Editorial comment.
One writer, which I actually put in the book, found it deplorable.
There were so many women present, they felt that it was not refined.
Not refined.
And at that time, it would have been very helpful for me to have had Grace present.
But she wasn't.
She was already in the penitentiary.
too bad for me.
I couldn't change it.
How would that have happened?
Oh, you could have had, you know, it's a pretty dramatic scene, watching this person that you may or may not have been having an affair with.
Or that you may or may not have.
Or that you may or may not have helped kill somebody.
I mean, your feelings could be in a variety of directions as well.
A huge variety.
Better him than me.
Phew, that was a close one.
Goodbye, love of my life.
I mean, there's just... I got away with it.
A lot of things that could have happened in that scene, but in fact they didn't because she wasn't there.
How does this...
I mean, it really is.
I wouldn't call it the odd book in the corpus, but it certainly is quite distinctive.
How does this fit into the scheme, I guess?
There is no scheme.
Or let us say, there may be a scheme, but we certainly do not perceive, at least I don't perceive, its total outlines at the moment, because I'm not dead yet.
Thank God.
I think you can only do that total scheme thing with somebody when you have the total scheme.
You know, I did an interview with Nadine Gordon.
made the comparison.
She said it's like walking into a room and seeing a sculpture, a piece of sculpture.
And every book is almost a different view of walking around and seeing the same piece from a different angle.
She almost feels that her whole body of work is really one work told.
I think that may be true of her
She has been very, very focused on South Africa and how it works, how it has worked over the years.
You can look at it from this angle, you can look at it from that angle, underneath to the top, from the top down, into the future with July's people, which I think is a wonderful book.
So I think that can be true, but I would hesitate to...
make that kind of statement about my own work.
The idea of going back into the past, I guess, is just another challenge, a creative challenge.
It was certainly a challenge, and it was not something that occurred to me to do before I did it.
Really?
No.
two historical things.
Actually, I'd done three historical things.
I did the journals of Susanna Moody, which is a book of poems.
I did one of the volumes in a series called The Illustrated Social History of Canada.
I did 1815 to 1840.
And I did a short piece called Marrying the Hangman that was based on...
case in Quebec in the 18th century in which the law was that if you were the hangman or you were married to the hangman you couldn't be hanged and this woman who was condemned to death for theft talked to a guy in the cell next to her she didn't see him she talked to him through a hole in the wall he was in jail for dealing he wasn't condemned to death at all
She talked him into becoming the hangman, because the position was vacant, and also into marrying her.
And thus she got herself off.
Kind of like the convention of an American citizen marrying somebody so they can get citizenship.
Yeah, but what motivation was there for him?
He wasn't going to die.
She must have been very persuasive.
Maybe he needed a job.
I doubt it.
Somehow.
It's an awful job.
Nobody wanted it.
That's why they had these perks.
So I did that one, and I lie.
I did a fourth historical thing, which was a series of poems by Mary Webster, who was before the Salem witchcraft trials.
Before?
Before, just before.
If it had been during, she would have been
she would have been done for.
But she was actually tried for witchcraft, and she got off, but the townspeople didn't like the verdict, so they hanged her anyway.
And she survived Connecticut.
You didn't have witchcraft trials in Canada.
I don't think we had enough people then.
You know, this was 17th century.
It was Quebec.
They had them in France to a certain extent.
They had them in southern Germany a lot.
I would have to look at the back and see.
There were some people, I know there were some people who were thought to be witches, and I know there was at least one who was killed for it, but I would have to look and see.
What a metaphor for fiction writers, though.
Oh, well, the New England one is really unique.
In all of the witchcraft stuff that went on, this is a really extraordinary story the Salem one.
It's astonishing.
Well, and Arthur Miller's, you know, The Crucible, which is now... Yeah, it's going to come out again.
...coming out again.
Of course, what makes that his telling of The Witchcraft Girls is the resonance that it had
the time he was writing it.
Similarly, do you see any kind of contemporary resonances in this book?
Well, as Robertson Davies says, we cannot help but be contemporary.
Bless us all.
No matter where we are setting our books or when we're setting them, we can't help it.
For instance, A Tale of Two Cities set at the time of the French Revolution.
But it's obviously a Victorian novel.
And so it goes.
You know, you have all this medievalism of the 19th century.
You have Idols of the King, which is sort of echt Victorian.
Nothing could be more Victorian than it.
But it's, quote, historical.
King Arthur, Round Table, all of that.
So you agree that...
Well, all fiction is about when it's written, no matter when it says it's about.
So the things that interest me about this case were not necessarily the things that would have interested somebody writing about it then.
if you see what I mean.
I'm interested in the ambiguities.
They were interested in certainties, which they made up even if they weren't failable.
And the ambiguities, in fact, continue in this book to the very end.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, reading all of the things, they were there.
It's just that the people who chose to write about it liked to
not see them.
So the ambiguities actually did appeal to you?
Of course, of course, because I'm a late 20th century person.
Of course they did.
For instance, the lunatic asylum, which she spent almost two years in.
Susanna Moody's thing was simple.
She was a raving lunatic.
She was probably crazy at the time of the crime.
That accounts for it.
and she'll be forgiven in heaven because of having been crazy from the very beginning.
End of case.
A later writer in the century says she was faking.
She wasn't a lunatic at all.
A lot of people did fake, at point of fact, because it was nicer in the asylum, better food.
They were treated better, and it was easier to escape.
So he takes a very anti-grave stand.
It's faking, hypocrite, liar, etc.
It is.
And she gets shipped back to the penitentiary.
So if anybody saw her on the violent ward, and I'd believe her.
She'd usually, if she saw something, that's usually what was there.
But what did she really see?
She saw somebody running around and screaming.
Well, I can run around and scream, too.
It didn't occur to her that this might not be what she was really seeing.
I didn't realize that you could actually go observe these people like you only did this.
Yeah, absolutely.
You absolutely could.
They did that in England.
That's where the word bedlam gets.
Yeah, but that practice continued into the 19th century, although with a different gloss on it.
It was supposed to be educational and instructional and of a reforming nature.
As opposed to entertainment.
As opposed to entertainment, yeah.
And you were also supposed to be admiring the modernity and convenience of the arrangements.
Well, the arrangements, you know, the building, the architecture, the arrangements.
It so happens, as I put in my book, that the Lunatic Asylum in Toronto, which had this wonderful architectural appearance,
somebody had forgotten to connect the drain pipes up to the main sewer.
So poor old Dr. Workman, who was an admirable character, when he came in his head, one of the first things he found was that the cellar was full of horrible sludge, which was all the sewage down there.
And he said, that explains all these cases of illness that we have had.
It's also true that when they did connect it up,
They had the water intake coming out of Lake Ontario.
The water that they were drinking was right next to the sewage pipe.
You can't really believe it.
But similar things happen today.
It's just that we're usually in the construction business.
Somebody uses bad cement to save money, and the thing falls down.
You did a lot of research for this.
Yeah, what fun it was.
That must have been a lot of fun.
It had been in so many different directions.
There's one little part where I say, she says, the ladies look like jellyfish.
And I thought, were there jellyfish in Northern Ireland?
Off to the Encyclopedia of Zoology.
Boy, that's the kind of thing, if you get wrong...
Somebody's going to whack you on it.
Somebody is.
They certainly are.
Well, in fact, the warden made a mistake.
Could I have the bill, please?
Oh, thank you.
The warden made a mistake in his journal, which I expect he was writing up afterwards, as lots of people did.
And it's the point towards the end at which he says, you know, Friday so-and-so got the pardon.
for Grace Tuesday, the such-and-such drove her to her destination, this home that had been provided, etc.
What a mystery that is.
Only it wasn't a Tuesday.
It was a Wednesday.
So the dilemma is, do you change it for him?
Or do you put what he actually wrote?
Well, speaking to my rules, I put what he actually wrote.
And, of course, somebody writes and says, you know, that wasn't a Tuesday.
I really commend you.
I just wonder how many fiction writers would be that true to... Well, some of them are.
The better historical fiction ones, for instance, I read a book on Amy Robesart.
that one of Elizabeth I's suitor's wife found at the bottom of the stairs, neck broken, etc.
And she went to quite a lot of trouble to figure out what must have happened, and she presents her evidence.
And that's the kind I prefer to read.
And I'm not interested in ones that just are kind of dressed up fantasy.
Anyway, they usually get the clothes wrong, and I don't like that.
At what point did you decide that maybe a couple of voices would be appropriate here?
From the beginning, I did, because I had originally Susanna Moody as a character writing letters.
That was something I had to throw out.
I couldn't use it.
So I had somebody writing letters from the beginning, and then once I got into writing letters,
I got into writing more letters and different letters.
And it's often a very good and quick way of placing a person, letting you know something of their background and the other forces in their life.
For instance, Mrs. Jordan, who is Simon Jordan's mother, a letter from her, and you get his total home situation.
You know, you know exactly what he's dealing with with his mother.
Did you have this Jordan episode?
Actually, I wanted it to be Dr. Workman, but then I did my research.
I found out that Dr. Workman had only known Grace Marks for three weeks.
He was the guy who sent her back.
So I couldn't use it.
That wasn't going to work, yeah.
No, so I had to have somebody like him with his interests.
And that got me into reading up on pre-Freudian psychiatry, which is a hugely fascinating area.
And I read a biography of a country doctor called Dr. Langstaff, who actually practiced in Richmond Hill, but after Grace was no longer there.
And it gives his background where he studied.
It happens to be the same medical school that Simon Jordan studied at.
That's great.
Sort of what they did, what they believed about drugs and these things and those things.
And he was, in fact, recording the dreams of his patients because they were thought to be diagnostic.
And he was writing them down.
The reason he makes such a good subject was he kept records of everything.
So the person doing his biography had all this material, what he prescribed for this and that.
What a treasure trove for you, though.
Oh, gosh.
It was wonderful.
Cases in which an abortion was suspected.
Other cases in which an abortion was known.
Doctors who were suspected of not being on the up and up.
You know, people testifying against each other who he sent to the lunatic asylum and what for, under what conditions.
and as dr workman says and he really did say most of our cases are either alcoholism what we would call alcoholism or what he called religious mania so what were these religious manias really well they were probably you know what we would now call schizophrenic or possibly manic
Bipolar Syndrome.
Would you say they were pretty sophisticated?
I mean... No.
They weren't.
No, not at all.
But it's because they didn't know.
They were seekers.
But they did a lot more, I think, than we... They did a lot more than we think.
We think Freud came out of nowhere.
It's not true.
He came out of a whole century.
Yeah, they were deeply interested in these phenomena.
There are six nineteenth-century operas on the subject of somnambulism.
We only know the one.
Yeah, Lady Macbeth and Othelia combine into people like Lucia in the opera.
It's a very Shakespearean thing when Lucia comes in and does her mad scene, and this is the
These are the elements of the mad scene that they love so much.
The nightgown, the hair down, these are important.
Flowers, either they have flowers or they sing about flowers.
And thinking people are somebody other than who they are, et cetera.
So that was very interesting.
Shakespeare, Walter Scott,
and then into the opera and novel and poems of the Victorian age.
Fascinating.
And the painting, of course.
They love painting these figures.
There are so many Ophelias.
I'm sorry.
We have the book, of course, and I quite pointedly don't question about the book.
That's my job.
The book.
I mean, the novel is my job, so that's, you know.
How about some of these?
Do you respond at all to some of the suggestions that this is kind of a companion volume to Amy's tale?
Do you agree with that?
Well, I think what they have in common is central character living under difficult circumstances.
Okay.
But you could almost say that about a lot of the characters.
Well, difficult and closed circumstances that you can't get out.
You could say they have that in common.
You could say concealing headgear or long dresses.
I don't know.
But apart from that, I think that the other thing they have in common is that
that neither the future nor the past are with us now neither of these things are where we are living right now is it reflective of certain themes that here we are back at the big sculpture problem I mean I just I shy away from those questions because if I say anything about it then that becomes the definitive thing and it's what everybody thinks and I think that really constrains debate and limits ways of looking at things
I acknowledge that, and then it gets in print.
Then it gets into print, and then it becomes dogma, and then it becomes silly and ridiculous.
You can just throw out something as an idea that's floated through your head, and everybody thinks it's engraved in stone.
Certainly for these people who haven't read you, number one, and number two, perceive you as being this hard-line woman...
embracing women's issues, whatever, themes.
That's not the case in this particular book.
Well, you know, if you come to think of it, was it ever the case, or was this something made up by some frightened people?
Well, I said we probably haven't read the book.
Yeah.
I mean, hard line is, men are all bad, let's push them off a cliff.
That has never been anything that I have been at all interested in.
And I think in particular in this book, where it is an ambiguous resolution, or there is no resolution at all.
I mean, take your pick.
And whatever you think happened, you quite scrupulously kept to yourself, too, as I imagine you intend to do.
She says, nodding.
I'm told that there...
in a classroom in one of our universities, which I will not name, taking, quote, women's issues.
The class was debating on whether or not I was, quote, a real feminist because the heroine of Cat's Eye gets along well with her brother.
Now, what is their idea of a real feminist?
I mean, it boggles the mind.
I cannot imagine.
There was a book that came out... And others sitting around debating darkly, deciding that I must have a very bad relationship with my mother, or else I would not have written such negative female characters.
There was a book that came out... I get along fine with my mother.
Thank you.
A book that came out last summer...
Push by this woman, Sapphire, you know, the book.
And of course, if you believe what you read, I, as a middle-aged white male, would feel threatened and hate this book.
I read it, I thought it was extraordinary, and I interviewed the woman, you know.
If you read the book, it's about a child who begins to, a young girl who
has this awakening experience with literacy I mean and you know but if you read the clips you're going to perceive yourself as the enemy you know it's the most ridiculous thing I've ever seen anyway I think a lot of people have been given a negative spin in this country that they don't deserve over the years maybe not so much now but over the years I think I'm
especially at the beginning, people tended to polarize a lot on issues.
This new book that I'm working on will pay particular attention to these canon wars, the literary canon debates.
That's not going to be the whole book.
It'll just be a concluding chapter.
Libraries of the future, the shape of... I mean, I look at your novel, which is not only beautifully written, but beautifully produced, and you look at...
You look at the poetry and all the other little touches that are there.
Do you have any thoughts on the shape of books?
I mean, we talk about hypertext, for instance.
You mean internet things?
Yeah, well, people can actually conceive of books where maybe there isn't even one author.
Oh, this has been the Bible, you know.
It's a book like that.
Not one author unless we decide that God wrote the whole thing, but we know that it was written over many different time periods and then put together into something we now think as a book.
And this whole concept of hypertext, it's even possible that other people could go in and...
Rearrange your touch.
Rearrange your story.
Well, of course, Mr. Baudler was doing that.
I have that in the notes from this chapter of Thomas Baudler.
This is not a new thing.
Precisely, but he did.
Of course he did for the rest.
And actually, there's this book I have with me called The Future of the Book, and we'll have to do some research after this.
There are any number of instances, especially a playwright who works with a director.
You talk about writing a play, and what actually is presented is very rarely the actual thing.
There are a number of European playwrights who actually solicited the... Well, and you know Shakespeare and all the arguments about the first folio and this version, that version, and which version is it.
He was indifferent to publishing books in his lifetime.
Of course.
They weren't the thing then.
The main event was on the stage, and the only time he may have participated in some of the quartos, because piracy's got them so wrong, and they had to correct it and say, this is ridiculous, let's get it right.
But he had nothing to do with the publication of his own works in the portfolio.
So who's to say?
But I'm wondering, do you have any thoughts on
I don't think, you know, the book with pages and a cover, I don't think that's going away soon at all.
You can't take a computer to bed with you.
And the book, I think it was Bill Gates who said, the book is already fully interactive.
You can turn backwards, you can turn forward, you can do it a heck of a lot faster than you can do it on a screen.
It doesn't give you the same kind of dry eyes and things.
You can do it at your own speed.
You can start in the middle and go towards both ends, as I sometimes do.
So I don't think it's going anywhere at all.
There are actually studies over at MIT, and I have to go get them at the Media Lab.
I'm sure it's true.
And I know that as a writer, I'm sure that you write something one way, and you know it's going to appear differently when it appears in print.
I mean, I know this doing, working for newspapers and writing on a computer screen, when something comes out as a page of manuscript, it's different.
Well, that's why I always correct on the actual printout.
And indeed, I usually begin with a longhand version.
Is the debate in Canada as acrimoniously waged over this canon debate that we have here?
It's waged.
I don't think anything is quite as acrimonious there as it is here.
Well, some things are.
You're not too into the Quebec issue.
They get acrimonious about that.
I don't think there's just one canon anymore.
I think there are many canons
I think that's the answer, by the way.
Yeah.
You know, there wasn't ever just one canon.
There were schools that had canons, but if you went to another school, it would be a different canon.
Of course, the whole concept of canon is fairly recent in any case.
I think it's very—I never heard that word before, probably in the 1980s.
It's really kind of come upon us.
And who reads the classics anymore?
I do, but not all of them.
You know, I read Greek, I read the Greek plays, and I think that this is my daughter's son.
Which is sometimes astonishingly modern in their point of theater.
My younger daughter just read Medea, you know.
Yeah, astonishingly modern.
Amazing.
A lot to be said about that.
Do you feel that at work, Scott Turow told me this story.
I was telling him.
I said, how do you respond when you're told that you can go to Georgetown University and get a degree in English literature without being required to study Shakespeare?
He said, I'll do you one better than that.
He's an alumnus of Amherst College.
He said he was at a dinner, and he said, use it, too.
I mean, I'm going to check it out.
But he was at a dinner with the president of the college.
When the president was informed,
that they had just graduated a summa cum laude in English, and this student had never studied Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, or Spencer, and that this person not only got a degree in English, I mean, literature is a different thing, but to call it English literature, and to give him a summa on top of that... Well, what you feel is that the kid has been shortchanged.
The kid has been shortchanged.
How worthwhile is such a degree, I wonder?
Well, that isn't even to me the question.
The question is, this is somebody who has been deprived of something that ought to have been available to him.
It was a him.
I asked him, was it a him, and it was a him.
It would almost even make more sense if it were a woman.
because of this whole concept of dead white European males.
Well, I object to the deadness in that phrase.
We're all going to be dead one day.
Who are these people that think they're never going to be dead?
I did an interview with Harold Bloom for this new book.
And he said, you know, this whole thing, he was talking about Omens and Millennium, his book, and he said, you know, this whole, I'm really bothered by this whole concept of the near-death experience.
All of life is the near-death experience.
That's right.
Well, they knew that in the 17th century.
As I am now, you soon will be.
But do you feel that a book has to be relevant?
Relevant is relative, relevant to him.
I just read a book that was intensely relevant to me, but I doubt that it would be very relevant to many of the other people reading it.
What was that book, Out of Curiosity?
Out of Curiosity.
It was a book by a man called Carlo Ginzburg, who was an explorer of little-known folkways.
I love that book.
Well, you might.
I might just look it up at the afternoon right now.
Deciphering the Witch's Sabbath.
And I personally found it intensely riveting, but many would not, partly because it is a very scholarly work.
It's an intensely scholarly work.
And not what we might normally call a literary work, per se, right?
Oh, I would say scholarly rather than literary, and also it's a translation, and I'm sure that in a couple of bits anyway it was...
Not totally well translated, but you better not print that.
That's fine, yeah.
Anything I'm doing now, if you don't mind.
It's a very interesting thing which goes into what the people giving the testimony, when it isn't just dictated by inquisitors and such folk, what they really thought they were doing, what they thought they were doing.
and where that thing that they thought they were doing came from.
And then he gets into, what does Cinderella, Achilles, and Oedipus have in common?
Good question.
He won't like this book.
If that question interests you, you will like this book.
Oh, I just look it up.
Carlo Ginsberg?
Carlo Ginsberg.
It's available in a quality paper box.
How on earth did I come across it?
I bought it in the store quite recently, so books in print will have it.
Or I'll get it up at the Athenaeum.
I'll get about ten books for you.
You know, we have had three prior interviews, so I don't really want to cover ground that we've covered in the past, and I feel free, I keep very careful notes and tapes, so I feel free to draw on that material.
I would love for you to describe a book before we go ahead.
Anyway.
Yes.